---
layout: post
title: Notes to self
---

# Time period
These are all the things I have learned after completing school from April 2023 to May 2025. I have completed half of my degree, and these are the life lessons I have come across till now. I will update this article when I complete it.

# Why I am writing
I don't know, I just felt that I should document my learnings on the web. Maybe this could help someone, or I can come back to this article at dire times and reflect. Anyway, let's begin from just after I completed my boards because that's when I got a taste of independence in life.

## Contents
- [Time period](#time-period)
- [Why I am writing](#why-i-am-writing)
  - [Contents](#contents)
- [Comparison is the thief of Joy](#comparison-is-the-thief-of-joy)
- [Stay Consistent, Make a Roadmap, Follow It](#stay-consistent-make-a-roadmap-follow-it)
- [You v/s You (Really)](#you-vs-you-really)
- [It's Okay to Fail (Trust Me)](#its-okay-to-fail-trust-me)
    - [So Fail and Take Risks!!](#so-fail-and-take-risks)
- [Be in the Moment](#be-in-the-moment)
- [Be Practical](#be-practical)
- [Don't Be Hard on Yourself](#dont-be-hard-on-yourself)
- [Learn to Let Go.](#learn-to-let-go)
- [Be Yourself](#be-yourself)
- [Your Fate is the Sum of Your Choices](#your-fate-is-the-sum-of-your-choices)
- [Health Matters](#health-matters)
- [Keep Your Head Down](#keep-your-head-down)
- [Dots Will Connect One Day](#dots-will-connect-one-day)
      - [Signing Out](#signing-out)


# Comparison is the thief of Joy
I never used to believe this until it struck me one day on the way back home. How happy I was on result day until I compared myself to others. Before that, I was truly happy, thanked God, and thought of all the good things I could.

# Stay Consistent, Make a Roadmap, Follow It
Staying consistent is still hard for me. But JEE prep and PUMEET prep have taught me that staying consistent and focused towards your goal comes from having a self-paced roadmap and discipline. It takes time for the results to kick in.

# You v/s You (Really)
I was able to stay consistent on the health journey for a few weeks, and it makes you really happy. When the results come in for different tasks, the results might take different time periods to see, but the urge to do 1% better than the last day keeps you going. It's the eternal fuel.

# It's Okay to Fail (Trust Me)
Be it JEE, PUMEET, asking someone out, or some random task, I have realized it's good to make mistakes and fail rather than not give it a try thinking what people will think of you, or fear facing yourself that you have let your dreams drown. It's all part of the process of growing, and failing is the best way to keep yourself reminded of what not to do next time in a similar situation.

You would want to fail as fast as you can if you know that success is after 100 failures.
### So Fail and Take Risks!!

# Be in the Moment
Through countless occasions, I have seen my peers focusing on documenting the whole thing about "how they are enjoying it" rather than keeping their smartphones away and really enjoying it. It took me about 2-3 months to figure out why I enjoyed some events more than others; that was because I was letting myself go unchained, being in the moment.

The human brain can store 2.5 petabytes (Scientific American, 2010). I guess that's enough for me, and that amount of storage would cost a lot for the "everything Snapchat" folks to document.

So Mom was right, "it is that damn phone."

# Be Practical
Set the goals you know you can fulfill throughout the day, but don't make them so easy that you may do them in an hour and call it a productive day, and not so hard that you are not able to complete even one, and it starts to haunt you how much time you are wasting. Find the sweet spot in between and gradually add little hard tasks and improve.

It's a marathon, not a sprint.

# Don't Be Hard on Yourself
You know it, Joban, you have been a lot hard on yourself for not doing many things as they wished to go. Just don't beat yourself up for them. Even if you are getting the work 80% done, it's good.

# Learn to Let Go.
I have not fully been successful in letting go of many instances of life, but what works for me is trying to erase the digital footprint of that day/guy from my life. It helps. It's not running from the truth. It's just good riddance from the people trying to pull you down.

# Be Yourself
Never try to make a second identity of yourself just to get accepted or please people. Be you. Do what you want to do. You choose which people stay in your life, just don't go reckless because at the end of the day, however at your prime you may be, you need at least that one guy/gal to celebrate with and share your woes.

# Your Fate is the Sum of Your Choices
Every little choice you make, the words that come out of your mouth, the thoughts you have, carry a lot of power. So speak wisely and think positively. If you do something bad to someone, it will surely come back to you in a much worse form, because if you sow a single tree of bad energy, it will reap many bad instances into your life.

Try to control your tongue and emotions at all times as much as you can.

# Health Matters
Your health matters a lot; focus on it. Try to work out every day and take a little weekend break when you are on a work spree for a few weeks. It helps the body to recharge and fuels you more.

# Keep Your Head Down
Always stay humble, modest, and never try to think you know more than one person. Always let others speak first, hear their views, thoughts, and opinions. Based on those, make your judgment. Be mindful of whether it should affect you or not.

# Dots Will Connect One Day
Just keep grinding, stay curious, and get things done. All of this will one day connect into a bigger picture. Believe it, it will.

Remember this:
If I remember how a single exercise from HARVARD CS50 has helped me many times when I write loops.

Don't lose hope.

#### Signing Out
Joban
26th May 2025